Throughout this
course, you've seen
statements like the
model demonstrated
good performance on this task or
this fine-tuned model showed
a large improvement in
performance over the base model.
What do statements
like this mean?
How can you formalize the
improvement in performance of
your fine-tuned model over
the pre-trained model
you started with?
Let's explore several
metrics that are
used by developers of large
language models that you
can use to assess
the performance of
your own models and compare
to other models
out in the world.
In traditional machine learning,
you can assess how
well a model is
doing by looking at
its performance on
training and validation data
sets where the output
is already known.
You're able to calculate simple
metrics such as accuracy,
which states the fraction
of all predictions that are
correct because the
models are deterministic.
But with large language
models where the output is
non-deterministic and
language-based evaluation
is much more challenging.
Take, for example, the sentence,
Mike really loves drinking tea.
This is quite similar to
Mike adores sipping tea.
But how do you measure
the similarity?
Let's look at these
other two sentences.
Mike does not drink coffee,
and Mike does drink coffee.
There is only one
word difference
between these two sentences.
However, the meaning is
completely different.
Now, for humans like us with
squishy organic brains,
we can see the similarities
and differences.
But when you train a model
on millions of sentences,
you need an automated,
structured way to
make measurements.
ROUGE and BLEU,
are two widely used
evaluation metrics
for different tasks.
ROUGE or recall oriented under
study for jesting
evaluation is primarily
employed to assess
the quality of
automatically
generated summaries by
comparing them to human-generated
reference summaries.
On the other hand, BLEU,
or bilingual evaluation
understudy is
an algorithm
designed to evaluate
the quality of
machine-translated text,
again, by comparing it to
human-generated translations.
Now the word BLEU
is French for blue.
You might hear people
calling this blue
but here I'm going to stick
with the original BLEU.
Before we start
calculating metrics.
Let's review some terminology.
In the anatomy of language,
a unigram is equivalent
to a single word.
A bigram is two words and
n-gram is a group of n-words.
Pretty straightforward stuff.
First, let's look at
the ROUGE-1 metric.
To do so, let's look at
a human-generated
reference sentence.
It is cold outside and
a generated output that
is very cold outside.
You can perform simple
metric calculations similar
to other machine-learning
tasks using recall,
precision, and F1.
The recall metric
measures the number
of words or unigrams
that are matched
between the reference
and the generated output
divided by the
number of words or
unigrams in the reference.
In this case, that gets a
perfect score of one as
all the generated words match
words in the reference.
Precision measures
the unigram matches
divided by the output size.
The F1 score is
the harmonic mean of
both of these values.
These are very basic metrics
that only focused on
individual words,
hence the one in the name,
and don't consider the
ordering of the words.
It can be deceptive.
It's easily possible to
generate sentences that
score well but would
be subjectively poor.
Stop for a moment and imagine
that the sentence generated
by the model was different
by just one word.
Not, so it is not cold outside.
The scores would be the same.
You can get a slightly
better score by
taking into account bigrams or
collections of two
words at a time from
the reference and
generated sentence.
By working with pairs of words
you're acknowledging
in a very simple way,
the ordering of the
words in the sentence.
By using bigrams, you're
able to calculate a ROUGE-2.
Now, you can calculate
the recall, precision,
and F1 score using
bigram matches instead
of individual words.
You'll notice that
the scores are
lower than the ROUGE-1 scores.
With longer sentences, they're
a greater chance that
bigrams don't match,
and the scores may
be even lower.
Rather than continue
on with ROUGE numbers
growing bigger to n-grams
of three or fours,
let's take a different approach.
Instead, you'll look for
the longest common
subsequence present in
both the generated output
and the reference output.
In this case, the longest
matching sub-sequences are,
it is and cold outside,
each with a length of two.
You can now use the LCS value to
calculate the recall
precision and F1 score,
where the numerator in both
the recall and precision
calculations is the length
of the longest
common subsequence,
in this case, two.
Collectively, these
three quantities
are known as the Rouge-L score.
As with all of the rouge scores,
you need to take the
values in context.
You can only use the scores
to compare the capabilities of
models if the scores were
determined for the same task.
For example, summarization.
Rouge scores for different tasks
are not comparable
to one another.
As you've seen, a
particular problem
with simple rouge scores is
that it's possible for
a bad completion to
result in a good score.
Take, for example,
this generated output,
cold, cold, cold, cold.
As this generated
output contains
one of the words from
the reference sentence,
it will score quite highly,
even though the same word
is repeated multiple times.
The Rouge-1 precision
score will be perfect.
One way you can counter
this issue is by
using a clipping function
to limit the number of
unigram matches to
the maximum count
for that unigram
within the reference.
In this case, there is
one appearance of cold
and the reference and
so a modified precision
with a clip on
the unigram matches results
in a dramatically reduced score.
However, you'll still
be challenged if
their generated words
are all present,
but just in a different order.
For example, with this
generated sentence,
outside cold it is.
This sentence was called
perfectly even on the
modified precision with
the clipping function
as all of the words and
the generated output are
present in the reference.
Whilst using a
different rouge score
can help experimenting with
a n-gram size that
will calculate
the most useful score will be
dependent on the sentence,
the sentence size,
and your use case.
Note that many language model
libraries, for example,
Hugging Face, which you used
in the first week's lab,
include implementations
of rouge score that you
can use to easily evaluate
the output of your model.
You'll get to try the rouge
score and use it to compare
the model's
performance before and
after fine-tuning
in this week's lab.
The other score that can
be useful in evaluating
the performance of your
model is the BLEU score,
which stands for bilingual
evaluation under study.
Just to remind you that
BLEU score is useful for
evaluating the quality of
machine-translated text.
The score itself is
calculated using
the average precision over
multiple n-gram sizes.
Just like the Rouge-1 score
that we looked at before,
but calculated for a range of
n-gram sizes and then averaged.
Let's take a closer
look at what this
measures and how
it's calculated.
The BLEU score quantifies
the quality of a
translation by checking
how many n-grams in
the machine-generated
translation match
those in the reference
translation.
To calculate the score,
you average precision across
a range of different
n-gram sizes.
If you were to
calculate this by hand,
you would carry out multiple
calculations and then
average all of the results
to find the BLEU score.
For this example,
let's take a look at
a longer sentence
so that you can get
a better sense of
the scores value.
The reference
human-provided sentence is,
I am very happy to say that I
am drinking a warm cup of tea.
Now, as you've seen
these individual calculations in
depth when you looked at rouge,
I will show you the results of
BLEU using a standard library.
Calculating the BLEU score is
easy with pre-written
libraries from providers
like Hugging Face
and I've done just
that for each of our
candidate sentences.
The first candidate is,
I am very happy that I am
drinking a cup of tea.
The BLEU score is 0.495.
As we get closer and closer
to the original sentence,
we get a score that is
closer and closer to one.
Both rouge and BLEU are
quite simple metrics and are
relatively low-cost
to calculate.
You can use them for
simple reference as you
iterate over your models,
but you shouldn't use
them alone to report
the final evaluation of
a large language model.
Use rouge for diagnostic
evaluation of
summarization tasks and
BLEU for translation tasks.
For overall evaluation of
your model's
performance, however,
you will need to look at one of
the evaluation
benchmarks that have
been developed by researchers.
Let's take a look
at some of these in
more detail in the next video.